Disk Scheduling
As we know, a process needs two type of time, CPU time and IO time. For I/O, it requests the Operating system to access the disk.

However, the operating system must be fare enough to satisfy each request and at the same time, operating system must maintain the efficiency and speed of process execution.

The technique that operating system uses to determine the request which is to be satisfied next is called disk scheduling.

Let's discuss some important terms related to disk scheduling.

Seek Time
Seek time is the time taken in locating the disk arm to a specified track where the read/write request will be satisfied.

Rotational Latency
It is the time taken by the desired sector to rotate itself to the position from where it can access the R/W heads.

Transfer Time
It is the time taken to transfer the data.

Disk Access Time
Disk access time is given as,

Disk Access Time = Rotational Latency + Seek Time + Transfer Time

Disk Response Time
It is the average of time spent by each request waiting for the IO operation.

Purpose of Disk Scheduling
The main purpose of disk scheduling algorithm is to select a disk request from the queue of IO requests and decide the schedule when this request will be processed.

Goal of Disk Scheduling Algorithm
Fairness
High throughout
Minimal traveling head time
Disk Scheduling Algorithms
The list of various disks scheduling algorithm is given below. Each algorithm is carrying some advantages and disadvantages. The limitation of each algorithm leads to the evolution of a new algorithm.

FCFS scheduling algorithm
SSTF (shortest seek time first) algorithm
SCAN scheduling
C-SCAN scheduling
LOOK Scheduling
C-LOOK scheduling

FCFS Scheduling Algorithm
It is the simplest Disk Scheduling algorithm. It services the IO requests in the order in which they arrive. There is no starvation in this algorithm, every request is serviced.

Disadvantages
The scheme does not optimize the seek time.
The request may come from different processes therefore there is the possibility of inappropriate movement of the head.

SSTF Scheduling Algorithm
Shortest seek time first (SSTF) algorithm selects the disk I/O request which requires the least disk arm movement from its current position regardless of the direction. It reduces the total seek time as compared to FCFS.

It allows the head to move to the closest track in the service queue.

Disadvantages
It may cause starvation for some requests.
Switching direction on the frequent basis slows the working of algorithm.
It is not the most optimal algorithm.